docs: tw786-monitoring (#3466)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: docs/launch-arbitrum-chain/operate/monitoring.mdx

---
title: 'Monitoring tools and considerations'
description: 'Tools available to monitor an Arbitrum chain, and a component-by-component reference of the metrics, signals, and thresholds to watch for the sequencer, batch poster, validator, and chain fees.'
content_type: reference
author: jose-franco
sme: jose-franco
target_audience: 'Developers deploying and maintaining Arbitrum chains.'
sidebar_position: 0
---

When deploying and maintaining an Arbitrum chain, there are several key elements that need to be monitored. This page has two parts:

1. **Monitoring tools** — scripts and services available to chain maintainers.

> 2. **What to monitor, by component** — a reference of the specific metrics, onchain signals, and thresholds to watch for each part of the stack (sequencer, batch poster, validator, and chain fees), plus deployment and hardware guidance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **What to monitor, by component** — a reference of the specific metrics, onchain signals, and thresholds to watch for each part of the stack (<a data-quicklook-from="sequencer">sequencer</a>, batch poster, validator, and chain fees), plus deployment and hardware guidance.
```

The metric names in this page are the internal Nitro metric paths (for example, `arb/sequencer/backlog`). On the Prometheus scrape endpoint, each `/` is replaced with `_` (so `arb/sequencer/backlog` is scraped as `arb_sequencer_backlog`). See [Enabling Nitro metrics](#enabling-nitro-metrics) for how to expose them.

## Arbitrum chain verification script

> The [Arbitrum chain verification script](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/arbitrum-chain-sdk/tree/feat-add-verification-scripts/examples/verify-rollup) retrieves information from an Arbitrum chain and its parent chain to verify that all parameters are configured correctly. After gathering the data, it generates a comprehensive report and issues warnings for any discrepancies detected. This tool is particularly useful after deploying and configuring an Arbitrum chain, to make sure that the onchain information has been correctly set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Arbitrum chain verification script](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/arbitrum-chain-sdk/tree/feat-add-verification-scripts/examples/verify-rollup) retrieves information from an Arbitrum chain and its <a data-quicklook-from="parent-chain">parent chain</a> to verify that all parameters are configured correctly. After gathering the data, it generates a comprehensive report and issues warnings for any discrepancies detected. This tool is particularly useful after deploying and configuring an Arbitrum chain, to make sure that the onchain information has been correctly set.
```

## Enabling Nitro metrics

Most of the signals below are exposed as Prometheus-compatible metrics by the Nitro node. Start the node with the `--metrics` flag to enable the metrics server, then scrape the endpoint at `http://<metrics-server.addr>:<metrics-server.port>/debug/metrics/prometheus` (default port `6070`):

```shell
nitro --metrics \
  --metrics-server.addr 0.0.0.0 \
  --metrics-server.port 6070
```

For metrics-server flags, memory-related metrics, health-check patterns, and Kubernetes `ServiceMonitor` examples, see [Node tuning and monitoring](/run-arbitrum-node/nitro/node-tuning-and-monitoring.mdx).

The signals that are not Nitro metrics — onchain events and account balances on the parent chain — are called out explicitly in each table below.

## What to monitor, by component

The sections below group the elements to monitor by the component they belong to. Each table lists the signal, where it comes from, what it means, and a suggested condition to alert on. Suggested alert thresholds are starting points; tune them to your chain's activity and settlement layer.

### Sequencer

> The sequencer accepts transactions, orders them, and produces blocks. Two different "backlogs" are often confused: the **sequencer's transaction backlog** (transactions received but not yet sequenced into blocks) and the **batcher backlog** (sequenced messages not yet posted to the parent chain). They are separate metrics and live in separate components — the batcher backlog is covered under [Batch poster](#batch-poster).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sequencer accepts <a data-quicklook-from="transaction">transactions</a>, orders them, and produces blocks. Two different "backlogs" are often confused: the **sequencer's transaction backlog** (transactions received but not yet sequenced into blocks) and the **batcher backlog** (sequenced messages not yet posted to the parent chain). They are separate metrics and live in separate components — the batcher backlog is covered under [Batch poster](#batch-poster).
```

| Signal                      | Source                   | What it means                                                                                                                                    | Suggested alert                              |
| --------------------------- | ------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------- |
| `arb/sequencer/backlog`     | Nitro metric (sequencer) | The sequencer's transaction backlog: transactions accepted but not yet included in a block. A sign of network health.                            | Sustained growth over several minutes        |
| `arb/sequencer/active`      | Nitro metric (sequencer) | Whether this node is currently the active sequencer. Useful when running a sequencer coordinator with failover.                                  | Value flaps, or no node reports active       |

> | `arb/feed/backlog/messages` | Nitro metric (any node)  | Messages in the feed backlog. A growing backlog means a node (for example, a follower or the batch poster) is falling behind the sequencer feed. | Sustained growth                             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `arb/feed/backlog/messages` | Nitro metric (any node)  | Messages in the feed backlog. A growing backlog means a node (for example, a follower or the batch poster) is falling behind the <a data-quicklook-from="sequencer-feed">sequencer feed</a>. | Sustained growth                             |
```

Reviewer 2: We don't need to mention sequencer feed here, a new suggestion fix is https://github.com/OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs/pull/3466/changes#r3628576982

> | `arb/feed/backlog/messages` | Nitro metric (any node)  | Messages in the feed backlog. A growing backlog means a node (for example, a follower or the batch poster) is falling behind the sequencer feed. | Sustained growth                             |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `arb/feed/backlog/messages` | Nitro metric (nodes with feed output enabled — the sequencer or a relay)  | Messages retained by the broadcast server until it sees them covered by batches on the parent chain. Growth means batches aren't landing — not that a follower is lagging. | Sustained growth                             |
```

| Signal                                    | Source                          | What it means                                                                                      | Suggested alert                                |
| ----------------------------------------- | ------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| `arb/batchposter/estimated_batch_backlog` | Nitro metric (batch poster)     | The batcher backlog: sequenced batches waiting to be posted to the parent chain.                   | Sustained growth over several minutes          |
| `arb/batchposter/wallet/eth`              | Nitro metric (batch poster)     | The batch poster account balance, in ether. Monitor fund usage directly from this metric.          | Below your funding threshold                   |
| `arb/inbox/latest/batch`                  | Nitro metric (any node)         | The latest batch number the node has seen in the `SequencerInbox`. Stalls if batches stop landing. | No increase while the chain has activity       |

> | `SequencerBatchDelivered` event           | Parent chain (`SequencerInbox`) | Emitted each time a batch is delivered onchain. The onchain confirmation that batches are landing. | No event within your expected posting interval |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `SequencerBatchDelivered` event           | Parent chain (`SequencerInbox`) | Emitted each time a batch is delivered onchain. The onchain <a data-quicklook-from="confirmation">confirmation</a> that batches are landing. | No event within your expected posting interval |
```

<VanillaAdmonition type="tip">

Monitor the batch poster account balance directly through `arb/batchposter/wallet/eth` (and the validator balance through `arb/staker/balance`, below) rather than estimating monthly spend from configs and gas multipliers. Direct balance monitoring reflects real usage; config-based estimation drifts from reality as parent-chain fees move. There is no automatic mechanism to refund these accounts, so keep them overfunded and alert well before they run dry.

</VanillaAdmonition>

If batches stop being posted, see [Batch poster troubleshooting](/launch-arbitrum-chain/operate/batch-poster-troubleshooting.mdx) for common causes and tuning flags.

### Validator

> Validators post and confirm assertions (historically called "RBlocks" or "nodes") of the chain's state to the Rollup contract on the parent chain. The metrics differ depending on whether your chain runs the legacy staker or the BoLD staker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Validators post and confirm <a data-quicklook-from="assertion">assertions</a> (historically called "RBlocks" or "nodes") of the chain's state to the Rollup contract on the parent chain. The metrics differ depending on whether your chain runs the legacy staker or the BoLD staker.
```

<VanillaAdmonition type="note">

> If you are relying on `arb/staker/action/last_success` and seeing it go stale for long periods even while assertions are being created, this is expected on two counts. First, that gauge only updates when the staker actually **sends a transaction to the parent chain** — during periods when the staker has no action to take, it stays flat even though the validator is healthy and polling. Second, it is a **legacy-staker** metric; on BoLD chains, assertion activity is tracked by the `arb/validator/poster/*` and `arb/validator/scanner/*` metrics instead. Prefer the assertion-progress and failure signals below over `last_success` as your primary health check, and corroborate with the onchain assertion events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are relying on `arb/staker/action/last_success` and seeing it go stale for long periods even while assertions are being created, this is expected on two counts. First, that gauge updates each time when the staker successfully acting  — during periods when the staker has no action to take, it stays flat even though the validator is healthy and polling. Second, it is a **legacy-staker** metric; on BoLD chains, assertion activity is tracked by the `arb/validator/poster/*` and `arb/validator/scanner/*` metrics instead. Prefer the assertion-progress and failure signals below over `last_success` as your primary health check, and corroborate with the onchain assertion events.
```

| `arb/validator/poster/error_posting_assertion`                  | Nitro metric (BoLD staker)     | Counter of errors while posting assertions.                                                                    | Any sustained increase                   |
| `arb/validator/scanner/latest_confirmed_assertion_block_number` | Nitro metric (BoLD staker)     | Parent-chain block number of the latest confirmed assertion.                                                   | No advance over an extended period       |
| `arb/validator/validations/failed`                              | Nitro metric (any validator)   | Counter of failed block validations.                                                                           | Any sustained increase                   |
| `NodeCreated` / `AssertionCreated` events                       | Parent chain (Rollup contract) | The onchain confirmation that assertions are being created. Watch alongside the metrics above.                 | No event over an extended period         |

<VanillaAdmonition type="caution">

> **High periods of inactivity can disable the validator allowlist.** If no assertions are created for long enough — determined by `confirmPeriodBlocks` plus the constant `45818` parent-chain blocks since the last assertion — the Rollup contract's validator allowlist mechanism can be [permissionlessly disabled](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-contracts/blob/main/src/rollup/RollupUserLogic.sol#L62). For chains settling to Ethereum or another Arbitrum chain, that constant is roughly seven days on top of the `confirmPeriodBlocks` period; for chains settling elsewhere, it is measured in the parent chain's block time. Alert on assertion inactivity well before this window elapses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**High periods of inactivity can disable the validator allowlist.** If the latest confirmed assertion (or its first child, once one exists) is older than `validatorAfkBlocks` parent-chain blocks, the Rollup contract's validator allowlist can be [permissionlessly disabled](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro-contracts/blob/main/src/rollup/RollupUserLogic.sol#L62). validatorAfkBlocks is configured per chain — read it from your Rollup contract; a value of 0 disables this mechanism entirely. Alert on assertion inactivity well before this window elapses. For example, on Arbitrum One validatorAfkBlocks is set to 201600 (~28 days of parent-chain blocks).
```

</VanillaAdmonition>

### Chain fees and load

> The chain's base fee is a useful signal of sustained demand. An Arbitrum chain has a `gas target` (also called the speed limit), measured in gas per second, that acts as a threshold for pricing. When cumulative usage exceeds it, a backlog of excess gas accumulates and the `L2 base fee` rises using an approach similar to [Ethereum's EIP-1559 pricing algorithm](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1559.md). The default gas target is `7,000,000` gas per second as of ArbOS 6 (it was `1,000,000` in ArbOS 0). A sustained base-fee spike therefore indicates demand is exceeding the speed limit — as a rough guide, 7M gas per second is on the order of ~2,000 simple transfers per second, though the exact transactions-per-second figure depends on the gas cost of the transactions being run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The chain's base fee is a useful signal of sustained demand. An Arbitrum chain has a `gas target` (also called the speed limit), measured in gas per second, that acts as a threshold for pricing. When cumulative usage exceeds it, a backlog of excess gas accumulates and the `L2 base fee` rises using an approach similar to [Ethereum's EIP-1559 pricing algorithm](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-1559.md). The default gas target is `7,000,000` gas per second as of ArbOS 6 (it was `1,000,000` in ArbOS 0). A sustained base-fee spike therefore indicates demand is exceeding the speed limit — as a rough guide, 7M gas per second is on the order of ~330 simple transfers per second, though the exact transactions-per-second figure depends on the gas cost of the transactions being run.
```

Reviewer: To verify!

| Signal                                | Source                  | What it means                                                                                  | Suggested alert                           |
| ------------------------------------- | ----------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------- |

> | `arb/block/basefee`                   | Nitro metric (any node) | The current L2 base fee. Spikes above the minimum indicate the chain is congested.             | Sustained elevation above baseline        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `arb/block/basefee`                   | Nitro metric (any node) | The current <a data-quicklook-from="L2">L2</a> base fee. Spikes above the minimum indicate the chain is congested.             | Sustained elevation above baseline        |
```

> | `ArbGasInfo.getGasBacklog()`          | Precompile (RPC)        | The backlogged amount of gas burnt in excess of the speed limit. Drives the base fee up.       | Sustained growth                          |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `ArbGasInfo.getGasBacklog()`          | <a data-quicklook-from="precompile">Precompile</a> (RPC)        | The backlogged amount of gas burnt in excess of the speed limit. Drives the base fee up.       | Sustained growth                          |
```
